---
layout: lecture
---
### Professor Alex Furman (University of Illinois at Chicago) {#Furman}

|       Date | Day |  Time | Location      | Title                                                                                             |
|------------+-----+-------+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2015-01-12 | Mon | 12:15 | Schreiber 006 | [Rigidity for groups with hidden symmetries](#Furman1)                                            |
| 2015-01-14 | Wed | 14:10 | Schreiber 007 | [Simplicity of the Lyapunov spectrum via boundary theory](#Furman2)                               |

<!--+++-->

### Abstracts: ###

---

#### Simplicity of the Lyapunov spectrum via boundary theory #### {#Furman1}

Consider products of matrices that are chosen using some ergodic
stationary random process on $G=SL(d,R)$, e.g. a random walk on $G$.
The Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem (Oseledets) asserts that
asymptotically such products behave as $\exp(n\Lambda)$ where $\Lambda$
is a fixed diagonal traceless matrix, called the Lyapunov spectrum of
the system.
The spectrum $\Lambda$ depends on the system in a mysterious way, and
is almost never known explicitly.
The best understood case is that of random walks, where by the work of
Furstenberg, Guivarch-Raugi, and Gol'dsheid-Margulis we know that the
spectrum is simple (i.e. all values are distinct) provided the random
walk is not trapped in a proper algebraic subgroup.
Recently, Avila and Viana proved a conjecture of Kontsevich-Zorich
that asserts simplicity of the Lyapunov spectrum for another system
related to Teichmuller flow.

In the talk we shall describe an approach to proving simplicity of the
spectrum based on ideas from boundary theory that were developed to
prove rigidity of lattices.

Based on joint work with Uri Bader.

---

#### Rigidity for groups with hidden symmetries #### {#Furman2}

Abstract:
In the 1970s G.A.Margulis proved that linear representations of
certain discrete subgroups (namely lattices) in such Lie groups as
SL(3,R), are essentially determined by the ambient Lie group.
This phenomenon, known as superrigidity, has far reaching applications
and has inspired a large body of research in such areas as geometry,
dynamics, descriptive set theory, operator algebras etc.

We shall try to explain the superrigidity of lattices and related
groups by looking at some hidden symmetries (Weyl group) that they
inherit from the ambient group.

The talk is based on a joint work with Uri Bader.
